## Slide 1

CT7121 Python Notebooks and Scripting
Week 7

## Slide 2

Python Files
We’ve been mostly using python notebooks, with the extension *.
ipynb
. But this isn’t the only way (or even the main way) to code in Python.
A lot of python coding involves using *.
py
files – python script files. These are basic text files – they don’t work like notebooks – when you run a script all the code in it is just run top to bottom without stopping.
Because of this, you tend to code in a different way in script files, using a lot of functions to control the flow of the program, as you can’t control it manually using
shift+enter
.
You need an editor such as VS-Code for these kinds of files –
jupyter
will allow you to edit these files, but doesn’t give a very good environment for doing so.

## Slide 3

Writing a script and main
This is how you would write a script to be run directly from the command line, via running “python test.py”.
The if statement at the bottom is the only code outside of a function.
This if statement accesses a private attribute of the script itself, automatically generated by the python interpreter, and checks whether the name generated is “__main__”.

## Slide 4

Writing a script and main
This “__main__” name is what python assigns to any script run directly, so it can be used to identify when the script has been run directly – and call the “main” function which is designed to be an entry point into the program.

## Slide 5

So.
. How else can they be run?
We’re talking about running python code directly from the command line, as if there were another way to run it – so what would that other way be?
You can pull a .
py
file into your own code (either another .
py
file or a .
ipynb
notebook) using the
import
statement – in fact this is how simple libraries work.

## Slide 6

Example

## Slide 7

More importing..
You can also import specific parts of a file (so you don’t need to preface the functions/classes you’re using with the module name).

## Slide 8



## Slide 9

More importing..
Or just import * (wildcard). This imports everything from a module – this is generally frowned upon in the python community, because it can pollute the global namespace.
When coding in notebooks, the rules can be bent slightly for convenience – because your notebook code isn’t likely to be deployed to production – but if you later need to streamline your code for deployment one step should be replacing any global imports with specific ones

## Slide 10

Points to note
This approach for code sharing works provided everything is within one directory – so I would recommend you code like that. Makes things easier.
It’s worth noting as well that code can both have a main function and the if statement to make it work – and be used as a module. This is often quite useful for debugging – you can write a main function which tests all your functions work, so that you can just run the file to test it – and then import it as a library and use those same functions from elsewhere.

## Slide 11

Useful third party libraries
We’ll have a brief look at some useful libraries, that may come in handy during your assignment.
The focus for this module is on your python coding ability rather than your analysis – will be looking for things like extracting information, constructing your own data types to store information, printing out useful information in text – you can use these libraries if you wish to help ( and get some early practice ) but they are not required.

## Slide 12

Matplotlib
Matplotlib is a library for creating plots of data – it can be used in notebooks and in ordinary python files (where it can output a graphic to disc).

## Slide 13

Seaborn
Seaborn is a library which sits on top of matplotlib (uses matplotlib) and gives a few easy ways to make impressive graphs, that otherwise would need a substantial amount of matplotlib coding to replicate.

## Slide 14

Pandas
Pandas is used for loading and manipulating data – it is very powerful although it has performance issues with very large datasets due to its single-
threadedness
.

## Slide 15

Tutorial
Break into your assignment teams
Sign up to Kaggle – and investigate what datasets are available
Find a dataset that you find interesting – should be tabular data i.e. excel-like, not image recognition data etc (which would just be lots of images) – you may use the titanic set if you wish
Load this into python and try out some of the graphs and libraries shown today – also have a go at generating some stats manually via python rather than just using libraries (i.e. mean of a column, median of a column, etc).
